---
title: "Monday morning thoughts: indirect influence"
date: 2018-12-03
tags:
  - sapcommunity
  - mondaymorningthoughts
---
*In this post, I think about how our work can directly and even
indirectly influence those that come after us, and about what this means
for how we should act.*

Last week's I attended SAP TechEd 2018 in Bangalore. Most of the time I
was helping out at the Developer Garage space, assisting the attendees
with [their progress through tutorial
missions](https://developers.sap.com/app-space.html). The atmosphere was
wonderful, I can't remember when I last experienced such an intense
collection of keen & enthusiastic minds. During that time, I had folks
come up to me to say hello, mentioning at times that they had read my
blog posts over the years and that it had helped them in their growth.

## Accidental influence

One particular person was Srikanth Peri whom I ended up interviewing on SAP
TechEd Live during the show ([Learning with the SAP Community and
Beyond](https://events.sap.com/teched/en/session/42606)), and he pointed
out that I had worked with him around a decade ago, remotely, when we
were both at AstraZeneca.

![](/images/2018/12/interview-photo.jpg)

Back then, I had designed and built some integration mechanisms, and
also some RESTful web services, for a project that was integrating SAP
and Ariba business processes. I had spent some time thinking about the
design of the URL space in particular, and how the methods & responses
would represent the actual business requests, and the responses thereto.
It turns out that that design approach had resonated with Srikanth and
had an influence on the way he saw things and approached integration
going forwards.

Beyond being a pleasant trip down memory lane, this really made me
realise that what we do day to day can have an impact on how others see
things. One person can indirectly steer another towards \-- or at least
reveal to them \-- technology paths that might be alternative or even
hitherto unknown.

## Starting young

I've been involved in teaching kids to code for a while. I am a [STEM
Ambassador](/blog/posts/2012/12/05/codeclub-and-becoming-a-stem-ambassador/),
and [ran a Code Club at our local primary
school](/blog/posts/2013/04/18/codeclub-thoughts/) a
few years ago. I volunteer at [Manchester
CoderDojo](https://mcrcoderdojo.org.uk/) where we have monthly sessions
that see up to 150 kids come by to learn and build with all sorts of
software and hardware tech. I even gave a TEDx talk on "[Our
Computational Future](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-gvOCaExeK0)" at
one stage.

I ran a Manchester Digital Laboratory ([MadLab](https://madlab.org.uk/))
centre for Young Rewired State (YRS) where we had a whole host of kids
design and build apps for a nationwide competition (see [Young Re-Wired
State - The
Film](https://madlab.org.uk/2013/10/young-re-wired-state-2013-the-film/)
for more info) that was sponsored by SAP - thanks again Thomas Grassl &
co.

In all these circumstances I and my fellow volunteers get to introduce
young folks to technologies - programming languages, frameworks and the
like, as well as analytical & logical thought. Reflecting on my time
running the YRS centre at MadLab in particular, I can see how the
amazing volunteers, with their diverse technical skills and passions,
will have had an influence upon those folks directly and indirectly. The
mentorship was sometimes one-on-one, sometimes in groups (and sometimes
peer-to-peer, which was wonderful to see).

Some of the volunteers are or have become well-known influencers in
their own right; a couple of examples that immediately come to mind are
the BBC's [Jacob
Clark](http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/internet/entries/2e3004e0-ab13-4ccf-b921-ca2bd2ff0cae) and
the co-creator of Wordpress [Mike
Little](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mike_Little)\*.

\* I love the fact that the photo on Mike's Wikipedia page is one taken
at MadLab during the YRS event that I'm recounting.

While I don't have any empirical evidence, I get the feeling that with
the young attendees of the YRS centre at MadLab, of the CoderDojo
sessions and even the very young CodeClubbers around the UK, there's an
unavoidable level of influence that is being generated, as the
volunteers share their passions and interests.

## Show your workings

Srikanth wrote a blog post on the back of his experience at SAP TechEd
last week - [Learning with the SAP Community and Beyond, 2018
Bangalore](https://blogs.sap.com/2018/12/02/learning-with-the-sap-community-and-beyond-2018-bangalore/).
In it, he exhorts us to "start sharing", in the hashtagged mantra
"#LearnShareRepeat". I'd like to echo this. Not only does sharing
strengthen one's learning, it has that added side-effect of helping
others grow, and influencing their thoughts and behaviours. I'm very
proud of how Srikanth described how he was influenced by the RESTful
design of those web services. I hadn't really thought anything of it, I
was, I guess, merely enjoying the wonder of what I'd recently
discovered and putting it into practice. Little did I know that it would
have an effect beyond making the mechanism work efficiently.

So I exhort you also to show your workings, explain your thought
processes, share your learnings, as much as you are able. Only then do
we grow as a community, only then can we help those coming after us to
make informed decisions on the paths they themselves might take.

It doesn't matter what form this sharing takes - blog posts, answers to
questions, thoughtful questions themselves, talks at events, videos,
even shared code on social sites such as GitHub. You never know when
what you say or write will have an effect on someone.

---

This post was brought to you by a rainy Manchester morning, and the
feeling of not nearly enough coffee as I recover from the SAP TechEd
Bangalore trip and the corresponding jet lag from my return home.

---

Read more posts in this series here: [Monday morning
thoughts](/tags/mondaymorningthoughts/).

---

[Originally published on SAP Community](https://community.sap.com/t5/welcome-corner-blog-posts/monday-morning-thoughts-indirect-influence/ba-p/13383686)
