---
title: "Monday morning thoughts: developers and advocacy"
date: 2018-07-02
tags:
  - sapcommunity
  - mondaymorningthoughts
---
*In this post, I think about what it means to me to be a part of the
Developer Relations team, and talk a bit about evangelism, outreach and
advocacy.*

It's been just over four months since I joined SAP's Developer
Relations team, and it's been a great experience so far. Primarily
because of all the awesome people I now call my colleagues, but also
because it helps me move towards being a better version of myself, which
is what one should strive for in life, right?

Developer relations is relatively new in the world of software, so it's
a subject that we can almost continue to define, or refine, as we
progress. It's a discipline that I first heard of almost 10 years ago,
about the same time as the advent of one of the early web-based
development tools,
[Bespin](https://blog.mozilla.org/labs/2009/02/introducing-bespin/).

## Bespin

![](/images/2018/07/bespin.png)

*The Bespin editor,
from <https://blog.mozilla.org/labs/2009/02/introducing-bespin/>*

I remember being totally awestruck by the fact that there was a very
usable editor that ran \*in the browser\*. Back then, it was unheard of,
and for many, way beyond what we thought possible in a browser.

That early version of Bespin was, as described in the post that
introduced it, an experimental prototype demostrating concepts and the
possibilities that it opened up. And my goodness did it open up
possibilities. Shortly after Bespin we saw the advent of another great
online Interactive Development Environment (IDE) in the form of [Cloud
9](https://ace.c9.io/) - I remember going to talk to the developers of
Cloud 9 at their booth at Google I/O in 2011, before they were
eventually acquired by Amazon Web Services. Of course, this laid the
path for what we have in the SAP world in the form of the great [SAP Web
IDE](https://www.sap.com/developer/topics/sap-webide.html) (and yes, I
am a fan).

Anyway, I digress.

One of the folks behind Bespin was Dion Almaer, who wrote a piece on
developer relations around that time, called "[Developer Advocate
versus Techncial Evangelist; When names change the
tone](http://web.archive.org/web/20170930044857/http://almaer.com/blog/developer-advocate-versus-technical-evangelist-when-names-change-the-tone)"
(I had to dig into the Wayback Machine to find it).

That short piece makes some points that resonate with me even today, and
in my new role I try to keep in mind the thoughts that these points -
about the different meanings of "evangelism" and "advocacy" -
conveyed. First and foremost, they're only words, and actions speak
louder. But the words have connotations that might influence those
actions, if one is not mindful.

## Evangelism and advocacy

Developer evangelism is a term now widely understood, as of course is
the more umbrella term "developer relations" (which resonates very
well with me). Developer outreach, or, more commonly, developer
advocacy, is a term that is possibly less well known but to me better
fits what the activities are within the Developer Relations context.

Evangelism has possibly a broadcast tone, even a religious one. To me
(not necessarily to everyone), outside of the developer relations
context, it suggests more speaking and less listening.

On the other hand, advocacy immediately conjures up the concept of "on
behalf of". Advocating on behalf of developers. Fighting their corner,
relating directly to them, acting on their behalf. Essentially, being
their advocate.

## Developers

But there's one question that one should consider here: Who are the
developers?

For me, there are two main groups, and the goal is for them to work as
one, learning from each other. The first group represents the developers
that are using the software. There's a good chance that you, dear
reader, fall into this group. The developers within (and beyond) the SAP
ecosphere that work on a daily basis building solutions at customers and
partners to solve business challenges using SAP software. This group is
the most obvious group with which a member of a developer relations team
has, well, a relation.

The second group are the developers inside of SAP, the teams building
the software that you use, or the platforms upon which you build. I had
the good fortune a couple of weeks ago to visit the mothership (also
known as SAP Walldorf), and popped in to building 03 where I had coffee
and chats with various people, including carine.tchoutouodjomo and
then rui.nogueira (with whom I chatted about the new Application
Programming Model, the interview of which can be found here in
transcription and audio format, courtesy of the excellent Coffee Corner
Radio podcast: [Interview with Rui Nogueira on the new Application
Programming Model for SAP Cloud
Platform](https://blogs.sap.com/2018/06/25/interview-with-rui-nogueira-on-the-new-application-programming-model-for-sap-cloud-platform/)).

I also got a chance to go and meet the teams behind two of my favourite
SAP Cloud Platform services: Workflow (see my [Discovering SCP
Workflow](http://pipetree.com/qmacro/blog/2018/01/16/discovering-scp-workflow/)
series) and Business Rules ([one of my
sessions](https://openui5.org/ui5con/agenda.html?view=speakers#letter_A)
at UI5con@SAP this year was on using the Business Rules service in UI5).
I got a chance to chat with them for pretty much an entire hour, and we
discussed all sorts of topics related to what they were building,
features, priorities, hopes, fears, and more besides.

![](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/DgNR7prWAAA6obe.jpg)

*Meeting some of the Workflow and Business Rules team at the mothership
([11:12 AM - 21 Jun
2018](https://twitter.com/qmacro/status/1009740837243277312))*

Reading back that last sentence, it strikes me that the image it conveys
is that of normal people. And that's the point I guess I'm trying to
make.

These folks are developers, just like you and me. And that is something
that I'm mindful of in the context of advocacy. All developers,
regardless of where they sit, need guidance, need representation, need a
channel over which they can communicate and share knowledge. If, in my
role in developer relations, I can help with that, through two-way
advocacy, then so much the better.

I strive to represent the external developer, advocating for them,
helping to start or improve in their understanding of various technical
areas and technologies. But alongside that, I try not to forget the
internal developers, for whom advocacy is also needed. Perhaps not in as
strong or direct a way \... but they're not machines, they're not
robots that build software, either.

## Keep on keeping on

In order to do this, there's something that is critical that I continue
doing. That something is developing. The more I continue to develop, the
better I can function as an advocate. If my development activities
dwindle, so does my ability to directly relate to the people I'm trying
to help.

So one of my aims is to continue being curious, continue building, and
continue learning. That's something I've done since starting with SAP
technologies over three decades ago, so I don't think I'll be giving
that up any time soon.

So those are my thoughts on developer evangelism, outreach and advocacy.
I'm extremely lucky and very happy to be a part of the developer
relations team at SAP, and I hope that I be effective in helping
developers inside and outside of SAP alike. I'd love to know what your
thoughts are on this. As always, comments and thoughts are more than
welcome.

---

This post was brought to you this morning by Pact Coffee's
[Planalto](https://www.pactcoffee.com/coffees/planalto) coffee, a breezy
but warm early Monday morning, and the quieter sound of my new [Logitech
K380
keyboard](https://www.logitech.com/en-gb/product/multi-device-keyboard-k380).

---

Read more posts in this series here: [Monday morning
thoughts](/tags/mondaymorningthoughts/).

---

[Originally published on SAP Community](https://community.sap.com/t5/welcome-corner-blog-posts/monday-morning-thoughts-developers-and-advocacy/ba-p/13380206)
