---
title: "SAP Community Coding Challenge 2 - Update"
date: 2020-05-26
tags:
  - sapcommunity
  - codingchallenge
---
*Here's a quick summary of where things are with the current SAP
Community Coding Challenge, and what's to come.*

(The contestants and their successful submissions have now been listed
in "[SAP Community Coding Challenge 2 --
Contestants](/blog/posts/2020/06/08/sap-community-coding-challenge-2-contestants/)").

The current SAP Community Coding Challenge was introduced in the blog
post "[SAP Community Coding Challenge
Nr.2](/blog/posts/2020/04/27/sap-community-coding-challenge-nr.2/)"
and the submission deadline was Thu 14 May. We spent last week having a
look at the submissions, and my goodness you all did a great job.

You sent in over 70 different solutions within the deadline limit, which
was very impressive to start with, but what's more - these solutions
were wonderfully varied in style, approach and construction.

Some individuals submitted more than one solution, and we got the
impression that you really enjoyed digging deep into different
techniques. Indeed, many of you seemed to be using this challenge as a
way to learn JavaScript, or level up existing JavaScript skills, whether
in the area of language, performance or style. To all of you - kudos!
Moreover, there were a few that included some functional programming
aspects, which delighted me no end, I will tell you that for nothing!

There were also some interesting performance optimisation techniques
(performance was not a key goal but it's fun to see how fast things go
anyway), a few that used libraries (including
[Ramda](https://ramdajs.com/)), and one particularly interesting
approach that embraced
[trampolines](https://raganwald.com/2013/03/28/trampolines-in-javascript.html).

We even had a few unusual submissions; one used [SAP Data
Intelligence](https://www.sap.com/uk/products/data-intelligence.html) as
the context within which to compute the answer, and another couple of
submissions technically broke the rules but nevertheless made us smile -
one was a solution in ABAP, and another in HANA SQLScript.

The challenge subject itself - the [Collatz
Conjecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collatz_conjecture) -
presented what we hope was an interesting topic generally, approachable
to all but with some bite to it nonetheless (one submission even
included a link to the paper [3x+1 search
programs](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/089812219290034F)).

![](/images/2020/05/Backgrounds-1920x1200-1.png)

There's plenty to talk about, that's for sure. So there's a live
stream scheduled for a look at some of your solutions. Following that
live stream, we'll have the pleasure of listing the contestants,
finalists and winner. Watch this space!

Solutions live stream:

**Date**
Mon 01 Jun 2020

**Time (0700 UTC)**
0900 EDT/GMT-4 (New York) // 1400 BST/GMT+1 (Manchester) // 1500 CEST/GMT+2 (Walldorf) // 1830 IST/GMT+5:30 (Bengaluru)

**Link**
<https://youtu.be/RKQTWR4-2PE>

**Title**
SAP Community Coding Challenge Nr.2 - Solutions

**Description**
A look at some of your solutions submitted for the current SAP Community
Coding Challenge relating to the Collatz Conjecture.

---

[Originally published on SAP Community](https://community.sap.com/t5/welcome-corner-blog-posts/sap-community-coding-challenge-2-update/ba-p/13433707)
