---
title: "An overview of SAP Developers video content"
date: 2020-11-09
tags:
  - sapcommunity
  - handsonsapdev
  - video
---
*There's a wealth of video content for SAP developers on the SAP
Developers YouTube channel. Find out what it is, and how to navigate
it.*

Back in January 2019, [our live streaming journey
started](https://blogs.sap.com/2019/01/16/hands-on-sap-dev-with-qmacro-new-live-stream-series/)
over on Twitch as somewhat of an experiment, before moving over to
YouTube. Initially we streamed to individual SAP developer YouTube
channels ([mine](https://www.youtube.com/djadams-qmacro),
[Max's](https://www.youtube.com/c/MaxStreifeneder),
[Tom's](https://www.youtube.com/user/ThomasJung1) and
[Kevin's](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCmGdtTTsVzqTY88N1ncUE_g))
but we soon pooled our efforts & experiments and all moved across, with
the rest of the advocates, to the [SAP Developers YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/sapdevs).

It's been a wonderful journey for us so far, being able to share
content with you like this, and in particular, the immediate and direct
connections afforded by live streams and premieres is one of my
favourite aspects. It's not by accident that my tweets about upcoming
live streams [often include](/tweets/qmacro/status/1325739914927878145) this
sentence: "*Join us for friendly chat and curiosity-driven
learning-by-doing!*" The journey is still in its infancy, so I thought
now would be a good time to highlight some of the content and help you
navigate it.

## Channel

First, the [SAP Developers YouTube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/sapdevs) should be your single
go-to destination. Make sure you're subscribed and you can use the bell
icon to get notified of upcoming content.

![](/images/2020/11/Screen-Shot-2020-11-09-at-11.26.31.png)
_The SAP Developers YouTube channel home page_

<a name="shows"></a>
## Shows

Next, we have different shows for you.

**Hands-on SAP Dev**: This is the original and still the main show - the
home of live content. There's a [general YouTube playlist for this
show](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQABOpzhd7WI-hMpy99PxUo0)
where all the individual episodes are listed\*, but note that there are
other more focused playlists that gather related episodes from this show
together in various series (see below). Generally each Hands-on SAP Dev
episode runs for up to an hour, sometimes less but generally no more \--
so you can reserve a slot for them in your day's work schedule :-). The
show has some regularity to it, in that, for example, Tom premieres
often on a Tuesday, and I stream on a Friday.

(\*older episodes are gathered in another playlist: [Hands-on SAP Dev
with
qmacro](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQAIntm7MkNk78ysDm3Ua8t0))

**SAP Developer News**: This is a relatively new show with episodes that
appear at the end of each week. The episodes are deliberately short so
you can consume them quickly; they're usually 5-6 minutes long covering
news highlights from that week. There's a playlist for this show too:
[SAP Developer
News](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQAVBSQXN9522_1jNvPavBgg).

**SAP Tech Bytes**: This is an initiative to bring you bite-sized
information on all manner of topics, in
[video](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQC3HBShmlMaPu_nL--4f20z) and [written](https://blogs.sap.com/tag/sap-tech-bytes/)
format. Everything you need from this initiative is accessible from the
accompanying
[sap-tech-bytes](https://github.com/SAP-samples/sap-tech-bytes/blob/main/README.md)
repository on GitHub - links to videos, blog posts, playlists, code
samples and more.

## **Series**

Of course, within the Hands-on SAP Dev show, we have different developer
advocates covering different topics at different times, and more often
than not, to cover a topic fully takes more than a single episode. How
do we group these episodes together? Into series, and we generally try
to represent each series with its own playlist. There are [many
playlists](https://www.youtube.com/user/sapdevs/playlists) available -
here are some examples of playlists for series:

[Getting the most out of the SAP TechEd Developer Keynote
repository](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQCBncEWbkHTLz7ykB9C7yof)

[Graphing SAP Enterprise Messaging
Artifacts](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQB9d462qCFLv2BW4o37ZaIC)

[Building
hana-opensap-cloud-2020](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQAHZ_V3cZsTok0T6BvI4HT1)

[Diving into messaging on SAP Cloud
Platform](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQCf--P9o7DtfjEcucimapUf)

[SAP Ariba for
Developers](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQDXSLHrSPtu8wztzDs8kYPX)

There are also some series playlists with Hands-on SAP Dev content on
the original advocates' channels, for example:

[Building a custom task UI for SAP Cloud Platform Workflow in two
episodes](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIeE5ve3c4ojUVPyfvAxOiH8)

[Data engineering and development with Witalij
Rudnicki](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIfPbBiF_qV_6e2rTvvbfECc)

[CF CLI
Plugins](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzLY5gikd9hAytq26IaPoHTwSk6tmgu61)

[Max's Adventure in SAP Cloud
Platform](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLzLY5gikd9hCE52Xlz9e9tYGQj_U2ThYx)

[Project Kyma and
Kubernetes](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLoc6uc3ML1JTXAKGQlvyIA8lGMELzEBS0)

There's even a specific "Deep Dive!" series collection too:

[Consuming remote services in CAP - Deep
Dive!](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIcbB-ia7Dn12v1MF8icslV7)

[Custom task UIs for Workflow - Deep
Dive!](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIfPdGVbhhAX5QPDTr_nQBuw)

[Workflow service on SAP Cloud Platform Cloud Foundry - Deep
Dive!](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIddRm4duZdbNhLkwA-_fV27)

[SAP Approuter - Deep
Dive!](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIeWt86gSTFJIuZnVUAwnoKh)

[OAuth 2.0 on SAP Cloud Platform - Deep
Dive!](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLfctWmgNyOIekHhglpEH_WX5lXEWoEwMF)

## Other Content

Beyond that, we have other content for you on the channel.

**Devtoberfest 2020**: Perhaps most significantly and recently, there's
the entire back catalogue of enablement content from the [Devtoberfest
2020 event](https://github.com/sap-samples/sap-devtoberfest-2020). This
enablement content is also organised into playlists - one for each of
the
[topics](https://github.com/SAP-samples/sap-devtoberfest-2020/blob/master/topics/README.md):

[project "Kyma" - Devtoberfest Enablement
Content](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQC33__v6BFLDcV32uy5D3Rz)

[Cloud APIs - Devtoberfest Enablement
Content](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQDmBzWkt2ZFE93QsZAnts-y)

[SAP HANA Multi-model -
Devtoberfest](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQA8za7iX9FRzewU7Vs022dl)

[SAP Business Application Studio for SAP Fiori Development -
Devtoberfest
Enablement](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQBFi4SK77b2y4EwlXMVG0XJ)

[SAP Cloud Platform, ABAP Environment & ABAP RESTful Application
Programming Model - Devtoberfest Enablement
Content](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQAoPZgVWPzIyTyHpJv00Zma)

[SAP Cloud Platform Workflow - Devtoberfest Enablement
Content](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6RpkC85SLQAutZYqIv9cuRdymlOmqM4K)

There's more content, but I'll leave it here for now. Don't forget to
subscribe, and have fun perusing and consuming the content. Let me know
if I've missed anything! Also, what else would you like to see?

---

[Originally published on SAP Community](https://community.sap.com/t5/welcome-corner-blog-posts/an-overview-of-sap-developers-video-content/ba-p/13482485)
