---
title: "Programmer's Day Mission 2020"
date: 2020-09-08
tags:
  - sapcommunity
---
*Learn about Programmer's Day and how you can take part in a fun
conversation that will earn you a special mission badge here on the SAP
Community.*

**Update Fri 11 Sep 06:20: The mission is live! Head over to the Coffee
Corner entry [Mission: What's your favourite programming language, and
why? ](https://answers.sap.com/articles/13140290/mission-whats-your-favourite-programming-language.html)
now and add your comment.**

Two hundred and fifty six. A nice round number. If you're a programmer,
of course. 256 is 2\^8, or the next number after all the bits in a
single byte have been filled, i.e. where 11111111 (255) flips over to
100000000 (256) in binary. A beautiful number.

So it's fitting that we celebrate the [Day of the
Programmer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Day_of_the_Programmer) each
year on the 256th day of the calendar year, which in 2020, a leap year,
falls on Saturday 12 September. If you live in Russia, you'll probably
get a day off, because it's recognised as a professional holiday there.
But if not, you'll have to be content with a happy conversation about
your favourite programming language, which we'll have during that
weekend, over in the SAP Community Coffee Corner.

As Marc Andreessen said, "software is eating the world". Some of you
might subsequently point out that Jeff Atwood said that "any
application that can be written in JavaScript, will eventually be
written in JavaScript" (now known as Atwood's Law) - and I know that
this will please some of you, and horrify others.

But anyway, as software's role in our lives continues to expand, it's
perhaps nice to stop and reflect on the the craft.

Here's how to take part in the Programmer's Day Mission 2020 and earn
yourself a cool badge.

Between Fri 11 and Sun 13 Sep head over to the entry "[Mission: What's
your favourite programming language, and
why?](https://answers.sap.com/articles/13140290/mission-whats-your-favourite-programming-language.html)"
in the [Coffee
Corner](https://answers.sap.com/content/kbentry/list.html) of the SAP
Community and add a comment to that entry, telling us what your
favourite programming language is, and why.

And that's it! Let us know, in the comments to that Coffee Corner
entry, what your favourite programming language is, and give us a good
reason why, and you'll be on the list to receive the Programmer's Day
Mission badge. But take note - the window for adding your comment will
be closed at the end of Sunday 13 September, whatever that means in your
timezone.

Good luck and have fun!

---

[Originally published on SAP Community](https://community.sap.com/t5/welcome-corner-blog-posts/programmer-s-day-mission-2020/ba-p/13490101)
