---
layout: post
title: Why we have /bin/ and /usr/bin/
tags:
  - autodidactics
  - unix
  - history
---

_There's a simple, historic reason why we have /bin/ and /usr/bin/_

I'd half wondered for a while why many of the directories in the root filesystem (`/`) of a Linux installation are also to be found in `/usr`. Recent convention implies that 'usr' stands for "User System Resources" but this is really only a sort of [backronym](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backronym).

There are executable files and libraries in `/bin/` and `/lib/`, for example, but also in `/usr/bin/` and `/usr/lib/`. Why? Regardless of what people might tell you today, the answer lies in the history of Unix (upon which Linux is based, of course). Created in the late 1960s / early 1970s on Digital PDP machines with limited disk space, the original Unix operating system binaries were placed on the root filesystem (mounted at `/`), with e.g. executables, libraries and configuration files split across `/bin/`, `/lib/` and `/etc/` directories respectively.

Separate from the root filesystem was another filesystem (on a separate disk) for users' home directories. This was `/usr/` - yes, short for "user(s)".

As the Unix system grew, the space on the root filesystem disk eventually ran out, and a decision was made to move some of the executable and library content over to the other disk that was mounted on `/usr/`. It made sense to replicate the names of the directories on that other disk, names which therefore became `/usr/bin/` and `/usr/lib/` because of the relation to where that filesystem was mounted.

Over time the place for the users' home directories moved from `/usr/` to `/home/`, meaning `/usr/` content eventually lost any semblance of user-specific focus.

A bonus, related thing I learned fairly recently is that the "s" in `sbin` (which also can be found in both the filesystems mounted on root (`/`) and `/usr/`) stands for "system" denoting that the content is only executable by the root user.
